---
title:  "About Me"
date:   1995-02-07 07:27:27
categories: [read and write]
tags: [meh writing]
---

#### This would be the part, where I'll tell you too much about meh
#### Testing

I feel blessed to be born as a son of an engineer and a lecturer. A naïve belief, that a kind of mathematics and physics blood running in my vein has long been the perfect explanation, why all the principles and patterns of physics always fill my mind with wonders. On the other hand, my love for art also arise as I used to spend whole day drafting mini paper robot design, folding, gluing, and even later, as I practice with the piano until my fingers are too numb to continue. For the majority, it is not straight-forward to see much relevance between science and art, a scientist would be someone who keeps his feet on the ground, while an artist would let his mind on the clouds. Despite that thin line of connection, I wish to choose not one, but both to pursue, as the intersection between the two is my forte, where geometry, physics, mechanical structure design, and of course, robotics lay. Through my time spending studying in these areas, it becomes crystal-clear that the ability to have a vivid imagination has started to become the key element which help me identifying my strengths, things that I could, believe and truly want to excel in.

With that preference, all related subjects have always received my inequivalent attention. Most recently, my last-year work has been vigorously appealing, yet constantly arduous and unforgettable as I took the challenge alone to design and conduct 3D simulation for a robotics control system. Since my initial given topic was invalid for my direction, I had to rebuild everything from scratch: from defining robot structure and measurement to designing hierarchical control system and conducting the 3D simulation. The final simulation was completed only 2 weeks in prior to the final presentation, with countless times that I stumbling with things I never knew before, times that I feel like meeting dead-end only to pick myself up and find the way around.

Continuing day after day till the end of the thesis, and the end of university in general, in term of knowledge, I have learnt so much. Automation in robotics is the key to the future. It has already changed the face of the industry by improving the productivity of countless production chain. With the helps of robotics arms, more assembling chains which required high level of precision and collaboration are also evolving. With regard to the research and development area, many humanoid and animaloid robots also have made significant progress in completing challenging tasks in harsh environment for human. Frankly, for such a young apprentice like me, both areas are intriguing and I want to be one of those that making new progresses.  However, I also gain more awareness of what I haven’t understand yet, that I am still only scratching the surface. My knowledge is bounded around the basics: degree of freedom, kinematics and dynamics, along some simple, theoretical control methods, and mostly with simulation, not realistic models. Meanwhile, the world outside is sprinting towards advanced and complex robotics materials and structures, higher-level control algorithms for more and more feasible, novel problems. Regardless, I determined to familiar myself with the basic first, such as working with basic model, computer vision, machine learning… before deciding on further direction.

Outside of theoretical knowledge, during my time in university, I received numerous chances to go out of my comfort zone:  volunteering as a member of AIESEC, attending exchange program in Poland, India, Singapore, Japan. It was through these experiences that I enhanced not only my leadership skills, perseverance, but also be able to see the world as it really is, through my own eyes, and the most importantly, to able to find my place in this big world, to see my true reflection and to be more certain of my direction. And the biggest one: is learning to force yourself to do things that you do not like, just because they are necessary for you to pursue things that you love. Not all aspects of robotics are lucid and interesting, but there are more to like in the field, enough to struggle through all others.
